---
layout: post
title:  "Finite Length Dipole Antenna"
date:   2023-03-03 12:00:00 -0600
categories: antenna_notes
permalink: /antenna_notes/finite_length_dipole_antenna
---
<!-- omit in toc -->
## On This Page
A variety of notes and equations specific to a finite-length (not short) dipole antenna.

- [What is an Long Dipole Antenna?](#what-is-an-long-dipole-antenna)
- [Summary of Equations](#summary-of-equations)
- [Far-Field Radiation](#far-field-radiation)
  - [Magnetic Vector Potential](#magnetic-vector-potential)
  - [Magnetic Field](#magnetic-field)
  - [Electric Field](#electric-field)
  - [Normalized Radiation and Power Patterns](#normalized-radiation-and-power-patterns)
  - [Radiation Intensity](#radiation-intensity)
- [Directivity](#directivity)


{% katexmm %}

A note on notation: All vector quantities will have a bar over them while scalar quantities will not. Unit vectors will be represented with a hat (e.g., $\hat{x}$) instead of a bar. Therefore, $\bar{A}=B\hat{x}$ describes a vector called $\bar{A}$ pointing in the x-direction with a magnitude of $B$.

---

## What is an Long Dipole Antenna?
A dipole antenna is any antenna that creates a radiation pattern similar to the pattern that would be generated by two charges separated by some distance (in other words: a dipole). Dipole antennas are frequently created using two conductors placed at some angle to each other. For example, the "bunny ears" on older TVs are dipole antennas.

For the purpose of these notes, a dipole antenna will be constructed of two conductors separated from each other by $180\degree$. The antenna will be center-fed.

-- PICTURE --

A *finite-length* dipole antenna is a dipole antenna that has an electrically long length. Half-wave and quarter-wave dipole antennas are examples of finite-length dipole antennas. 

## Summary of Equations
A summary of useful expressions that apply to finite-length dipole antennas is provided below. Select derivations are provided in following sections.

Note: The far-field results tabulated below assume a finite-length dipole antenna centered at the origin and aligned with the z-axis.

|---|---|
| Far-Field Property | Expression |
|---|---|
| Magnetic Field | $\bar{H}\approx\hat{\phi}\frac{jk\sin\theta I_0Le^{-jkr}}{8\pi r}$ |
| Electric Field | $\bar{E}\approx\hat{\theta} \frac{k\eta\sin\theta I_0Le^{-jkr}}{8\pi r}$ |
| Radiation Pattern | $f(\theta,\phi)\approx\sin\theta$ |
| Power Pattern | $F(\theta,\phi)\approx\sin^2\theta$ | 
| Radiation Intensity | $U(\theta, \phi) \approx \frac{k^2\eta}{2}\left(\frac{I_0L}{8\pi}\right)^2\sin^2\theta$ | 
|---|--- |

|---|---|
| Other Parameters | Expression |
|---|--- |
| Directivity | $D(\theta, \phi) = \frac{3}{2}\sin^2\theta$ |
|---|--- |


## Far-Field Radiation
### Magnetic Vector Potential
To find the far-field electric- and magnetic-fields for a finite-length dipole antenna placed at the origin, aligned with the z-axis, and fed a sinusoidal current, first find the magnetic vector potential of the antenna.

$$\begin{aligned}
    \bar{A}(x', y', z') & = \hat{z}\frac{\mu}{4\pi}\int_{L/2}^{-L/2} \frac{I(z)e^{-jkR}}{R} dz'
\end{aligned}$$

Where $k$ is the wave-number of the radiated wave, $L$ is the length of the antenna, $I(z)$ is the current along the antenna as a function of $z$, and $R$ is the distance between some point along the antenna and the observation location. That is:

$$R = \sqrt{(x-x')^2 + (y-y')^2 + (z-z')^2} = \sqrt{x^2 + y^2 + (z-z')^2}$$

Because the dipole is short $(L\ll\lambda)$, $R=\sqrt{x^2+y^2+(z-z')^2}\approx\sqrt{x^2+y^2+z^2}=r$. Further, the current distribution can be approximated as a line instead of a sinusoid.

-- PICTURE --

Letting $I(z)=I_0\left(1-2\frac{\left|z'\right|}{L}\right)$ simplifies the magnetic vector potential equation.

$$\begin{aligned}
    \bar{A}(x', y', z') & = \hat{z}\frac{\mu}{4\pi}\int_{L/2}^{-L/2} \frac{I(z)e^{-jkR}}{R} dz' \\
    & \approx \hat{z}\frac{\mu}{4\pi}\int_{L/2}^{-L/2} \frac{I_0\left(1-2\frac{\left|z'\right|}{L}\right)e^{-jkr}}{r} dz' \\
    & \approx \hat{z}\frac{1}{2}\frac{\mu I_0 L}{\pi r}e^{-jkr}
\end{aligned}$$

Note that the magnetic vector potential is half that of the ideal dipole antenna.

In the spherical coordinate system:

$$\bar{A}(r, \theta, \phi) = A_z\left[\hat{r}\cos\theta - \hat{\theta}\sin\theta\right]$$

### Magnetic Field
Using the magnetic vector potential, $\bar{A}$, compute the magnetic field.

$$\begin{aligned}
    \bar{H} = \frac{1}{\mu}\nabla\times\bar{A} & = 
        \begin{vmatrix}
            \frac{\hat{r}}{r^2\sin\theta} & \frac{\theta}{r\sin\theta} & \frac{\phi}{r} \\
            \frac{\partial}{\partial r} & \frac{\partial}{\partial \theta} & \frac{\partial}{\partial \phi} \\
            A_r & rA_\theta & r\sin\theta A_\phi
        \end{vmatrix} \\
    & = \hat{\phi}\frac{1}{\mu r}\left(\frac{\partial}{\partial r}rA_\theta - \frac{\partial}{\partial \theta}A_r\right) \\
    & = \hat{\phi}\frac{1}{2}\frac{\sin\theta I_0 L e^{-jkr}}{4\pi} \left[\frac{jk}{r} + \frac{1}{r^2}\right]
\end{aligned}$$

Because we are looking for the far-field radiation, $1/r$ is much greater than $1/r^2$. The magnetic field can be approximated as:

$$
    \bar{H} \approx \hat{\phi}jk\sin\theta\frac{I_0Le^{-jkr}}{8\pi r}
$$

### Electric Field
To find the electric field, compute: 

$$\bar{E}=-j\omega\bar{A} - \frac{j}{\omega\mu\epsilon}\nabla\left(\nabla\cdot\bar{A}\right)$$

After much tedious math (which I am choosing to not do, for now):

$$
    \bar{E} \approx \hat{\theta}k\eta\sin\theta\frac{I_0Le^{-jkr}}{8\pi r}
$$


### Normalized Radiation and Power Patterns
The normalized radiation pattern, $f(\theta, \phi)$, is simply the magnitude of the far-field electric field divided by its maximum value.

$$
    f(\theta, \phi) = \frac{\left| \bar{E}(\theta,\phi) \right|}{\text{max}\left|\bar{E}\right|} = \sin\theta
$$

The normalized power pattern, $F(\theta,\phi)$, is the squared magnitude of $f(\theta, \phi)$.

$$
    F(\theta, \phi) = \left|f(\theta, \phi)\right|^2 = \sin^2\theta
$$

### Radiation Intensity
To find the radiation intensity, or power radiated in a given direction for a unit solid angle, first compute the real-component radiated fields' Poynting vector (power flow density).

$$\begin{aligned}
    \bar{S}_r(r, \theta, \phi) & = \text{Real}\left(\frac{1}{2}\bar{E}\times\bar{H}^*\right) \\
    & = \hat{r}\frac{k^2\eta}{2}\left(\frac{I_0L}{8\pi}\right)^2\left(\frac{\sin\theta}{r}\right)^2 
\end{aligned}$$

Now, compute the radiation intensity.

$$
    U(\theta, \phi) = \bar{S}_r(r, \theta, \phi)\cdot \left(r^2\hat{r}\right) = \frac{k^2\eta}{2}\left(\frac{I_0L}{8\pi}\right)^2\sin^2\theta
$$

Because it will be useful later, I will also compute the average radiation intensity. To do so, sum the radiation intensity and divide by the surface area of the sphere with length $r$.

$$\begin{aligned}
    U_{avg} & = \frac{\int\int U(\theta, \phi) d\Omega}{\int\int d\Omega} \\
    & = \frac{\int\int U(\theta, \phi) \sin\theta d\theta d\phi}{\int\int \sin\theta d\theta d\phi} \\
    & = \frac{k^2\eta I_0^2L^2}{192\pi^2}
\end{aligned}$$


## Directivity
To find directivity of a short dipole antenna as a function of $\theta$ and $\phi$, divide the antenna's radiation intensity by its average value.

$$\begin{aligned}
    D(\theta, \phi) = \frac{\frac{k^2\eta}{2}\left(\frac{I_0L}{8\pi}\right)^2\sin^2\theta}{\frac{k^2\eta I_0^2L^2}{192\pi^2}} = \frac{3}{2}\sin^2\theta
\end{aligned}$$


{% endkatexmm %}


[ideal-dipole-notes]: ./ideal_dipole_antenna